Morning.
I'm just going to lift this up.
OK.
So I can actually read notes.
I have very focused, actually, so I don't have that issue.
Just say, for Marley Hill, Nicola was having struggle reading the writing and seeing people's faces.
And so it got a little bit complex.
So I have very focused.
There you go.
So just you've got our full optometrist.
Is that who we are?
Anyway.
Anyway, I need to stick to time.
I got told off last week.
So right, good morning.
Have said that.
Good morning, Marley Hill.
I hope you're having a nice morning.
And I know you had more snow than we did.
So I hope that was not too bad a journey for those who made it.
What a great time we've had this morning.
I mean, I'm sure worship has been amazing at Marley Hill, but what an amazing time of worship we've just had.
So last week we started this series called Rooted that Nick just said, and the underlying verse for this series is Psalm 1, especially verse three, but let me read you verse two and three, but whose delight is in the law of the Lord and who meditates on his Lord day and night?
That person is like a tree planted by streams of water which yields its fruit in season and whose leaf does not wither, whatever they do, prosperous.
So at the start of 26, the aim of this series is to help each of us put our roots down deeper into Jesus.
We wanna be like this tree.
Hopefully, blah, blah, tree.
There we go.
We wanna be like this tree that's just flourishing, that's green and fully alive.
We wanna be living the abundant life Jesus has made available to us.
And last week, we started with Jesus because it all starts with Jesus.
Our roots need to be planted into Him.
It's only He that gives us the life and fullness of life.
He needs to be our Savior and our Lord.
And it is a journey into life.
It's really important to recognize that.
It's a journey.
We are on a journey into fullness of life.
Now we put our trust in Jesus and we have that promise of eternal life.
But we have the promise of the resurrection for all who believe in Jesus.
But the promise of fullness of life is actually an invitation.
It's an invitation to step into all that Jesus has made available.
So I was wondering what people said about fullness of life.
So I've got a few little quotes.
John Calvin says this, we shall possess a calm and peaceful conscience.
We shall find in Christ the supply of all that is lacking in ourselves.
Julian of Norwich said, all shall be well, and all shall be well, and all manner of things shall be well.
Henry Newen, the greatest trap in life is not success, popularity or power, but self-rejection.
The life of the beloved is the life lived in the knowledge that one is loved.
Dallas Willard, you can't live a life that is not dominated by fear.
See, this is fullness of life that we can experience in Jesus.
No, it's
peace that steals our heart, comfort that anchors our soul, contentment that frees us from striving, joy that enlarges life and hope that steadies us even in suffering.
It is not an escape from life, but it is life deeply held by God.
And this is really only the tip of the iceberg of what it means to have fullness of life in Jesus.
The fullness of life, Jesus,
promised.
I'm not even going to ask the question because I'm guessing it's a rhetorical one.
Anybody not want that kind of life?
I'm sure the answer is no.
I hope the answer is no.
And especially in a world that just seems so chaotic and unpredictable.
But it's important to understand that promises are like gifts.
You know, somebody gives you a gift.
You could just put it on the shelf and forget about it.
Leave it wrapped, not even know what it is.
No, we have to unwrap the gift and we have to use it to get the benefit of it.
You know, promises like this, fullness of life is an invitation into the fullness of life.
It's why it's a journey.
We have to embrace the journey of finding and discovering and receiving the fullness of life.
It's not a guarantee.
Actually, we need to invest our life.
in all that Jesus invites us to, we have to be obedient to his ways.
I don't know whether you noticed in verse two of Psalm one, it says, but whose delight is in the law of the Lord and who meditates on his Lord day and night?
That person is like a tree planted by streams of water.
There is this thing, they invested in the word of the Lord.
You get the feeling they lived it out and therefore their life was like a tree planted by streams of water.
Fullness of life is a partnership.
We do what God tells us to do, and we receive fullness of life.
Philippians 2 verse 12 challenges a little bit more.
Therefore, my dear friends, as you've always obeyed not only in my presence, but now much more in my absence, continue to work out your salvation with fear and trembling.
So if we want to be like this tree, if we want our lives to be like a tree planted by streams of water,
which yields its fruit in season, whose leaf does not wither, whatever they do prospers, it takes efforts on our part.
We have to make good choices with our life.
We have to choose to put our roots deeper and deeper into Jesus.
Jesus in his own words and throughout the New Testament shows us some key choices we can make that will deepen our roots into him.
These are not religion,
they are life-giving habits that will help us to find this life that we want and we would love to have.
So today, we're going to look at what I believe, and I think the Scriptures tell us, is an absolutely crucial habit without which fullness of life I think is impossible.
And that is the command to gather.
In our context, together, I'm going to talk about this service and the service at Marley Hill, our worship services, our gathered environment.
So last year, we went through the Book of Acts for the first six months of the year.
I don't know whether, if you were around, you remember that.
It was epic, but really good fun.
And we had a series that we called Authentic Church.
And we looked at five things, the early church, through the second part of Acts, too.
were devoted to.
And we read in Acts 2, verse 46, it says this.
The right of the Hebrew builds on this.
Hebrew is 10, 23 to 25.
Let us hold on swervingly to the hope we profess, for he who promised is faithful.
And let us consider how we may spur one another on towards love and good deeds, not giving up meeting together as somewhere in the habit of doing,
but encouraging one another on, another on, no.
And all the more, as you see the day approaching, I might have slipped a word in there.
Last year, I went to the gym regularly.
And my fitness increased.
I've got a little Apple Watch and I could see my VO2, Max, I think it's called, and it was going up.
It was great.
And then I stopped going to the gym for a couple of months for various reasons how to cold and stuff happened.
fitness dropped right down again.
You know, our spiritual fitness is the same.
If we don't regularly become part of a gathered environment like this, our spiritual fitness decreases.
We slip further away from Jesus, our relationship with Him suffers.
Just as we need to exercise regularly for our physical bodies, we need to be part of communities like this for our spiritual lives.
To grow spiritually, we have to have our roots deep into Jesus.
You don't have to take my words for it.
You can see it in the Scriptures.
And sometimes it's explicit, like the chapter in Hebrews 10, but a lot of the times it's not.
And why is that?
Why is it not explicitly all the time, like go to church, go to church, be part of a church family, attend worship services, all of this?
Why is it?
Well, I think it's because the apostles presumed that that was just a given.
It was just a given.
You know, they would go to church.
They would gather.
I mean, in those days, there wasn't internet and all of those sorts of things.
The only way they heard the scriptures was it being read in community.
So it was a given that they would go to church.
So that the idea that they have to spell it out to Christians is kind of a bit of an alien concept to the apostles.
You know, in the 21st century, a lot of Christians in the UK kind of go to a Sunday service, maybe twice a month, and that's probably a positive.
You know, a lot of people less than that.
Well, the early church met every day, so that's 365 church services.
In the UK, probably average people go 24 times a year.
That's quite a significant difference.
Now, I'm not suggesting we meet daily.
Life has moved on.
Things are different in our culture.
But what I would suggest is that meeting weekly is a minimum if we want to have our roots deeply into Jesus.
And it's a spiritual habit.
Getting up on a Sunday morning, coming to be part of this church family or whatever church family you're part of, if you're just visiting, is a habit.
It's a spiritual practice.
that helps us build our relationship with Jesus and each other.
And I could finish there.
I could say, right, that's the end of the talk.
You might think, wish I would, but I'm not.
I've got more to say.
We must gather weekly.
But I want to spend the rest of the talk explaining why it deepens our roots in Jesus and how it helps us to receive the promise of fullness of life.
When I wrote it, it made sense, but it sounds a bit funny now, I'm going to say it loud.
I'm going to use the analogy of a runner bean plant.
I am a plant biologist, so I like my whole biology things.
For a runner bean plant to be healthy and fruitful, it needs sunshine, soil, nutrients, water support, needs the weeds pulling out and an absence of pollution.
If you can put all of those things in place, then you're going to have a
of runna bean plant that is living its fullness of life, and produce a fantastic harvest.
So let's start with the soil.
When you plant a runna bean, and I've planted a few runna beans in my life, any plant for that matter, you kind of dig your hole, don't you?
You drop the plant in, and then you put soil in.
Now, the amateurs might just leave it at that.
but no, no, you have to push the soil down, make sure the roots are stably put in the ground, then you put more soil on and put it down again.
So the roots are really anchored in the ground.
If you don't, what can happen is it can dry out in the warm sunshine and the plant will die.
The plant has to be anchored in the soil.
When you don't do this, it doesn't do well.
Does anyone know, in fact, I'm going to ask you a question.
So, Mark Hill, guys, get ready for this.
How many trees in Storm Arwin were blown down in Scotland?
It's a little quiz question.
So turn to the person next to have a guess.
How many trees were blown down in Storm Arwin in Scotland?
Okay, okay.
Right, okay, are we ready?
According to the BBC, and we believe the BBC, 16 million trees.
I know, I just read it three or four times because I didn't believe the number.
16 million trees, I didn't even know there was that many trees in Scotland, but 16 million.
The equivalent to 20,000 acres of trees.
So why did some trees survive and some trees fall?
Well, probably lots of reasons, depending on where they were on hillsides and stuff, but probably a lot because their roots were quite shallow in the grounds.
They just didn't have the strength to withstand the wind.
Last week here at All's End, I mentioned the hickory tree is exceptionally good at withstanding the wind.
Why is that?
Why is the hickory tree so good?
Because it develops a tap root, which is the main root, that goes 150 feet down into the ground.
They are anchored so that wind can come and blow and blow, but they're anchored into the ground.
And like analogies, you know, this analogy falls down in places.
And the difference between my runner beam plants and you guys,
is choice.
My run of beans plants, I don't have a choice.
They're going in the ground and they're going to be anchored into the soil.
We have a choice.
We can choose whether we're going to be anchored, whether we're going to put our taproot down into church community by being regularly gathering on a Sunday in a life group which we're going to look at next week.
We can choose
You know, we really, really put a lot of, we're very intentional about trying to help people become anchored in church.
It's why we have newcomers' meals, for those who are new.
It's why we have a vineyard 101, so you can understand what we believe and why things matter to us.
It's why we have life groups.
It's why we kind of have, bring and share lunches.
It's why we do all of these things, is that so people can become anchored.
in this family.
But it is a choice.
We have a choice.
Gathering weekly is a choice as to whether we choose to be anchored or not.
Ephesians 4 says this.
So Christ himself gave the apostles, the prophets, the evangelists, the pastors and teachers to equip his people for works of service so that the body of Christ may be built up until we all reach unity in the faith.
and in the knowledge of the Son of God, and become mature, attaining to the whole measure of the fullness of Christ.
Then we will no longer be infants tossed back and forth by the waves and blown here and there by the wind of every teaching and by the cunning craftiness of people in their deceitful scheming.
Instead, speaking the truth in love, we will grow to become in every respect the mature body of Him who is the head that is Christ.
From him, the whole body joined and held together by every supporting ligament grows and builds itself up in love as each part does its work.
We need to choose to be anchored in church family.
And then we need to choose to gather weekly so we can build up our faith so others around us can build up our faith.
And then we're not going to be tossed back and forth by all the winds of teaching and everything else that impacts
our life.
So that's first anchored into the soil.
Second, nutrients and water.
So once my runner beans plants are anchored, then the roots can start taking up all those wonderful nutrients and water from the soil.
For king gardeners among us, you'll probably know this already, but just in case here's a little biology lesson.
If you look at a leaf of a plant, you'll notice sometimes
they can have little different coloured edges.
So if they have like a red edge, then that often means that they are lacking in, what is it?
Potassium.
Yeah?
If it's a slightly purpley colour, then it's phosphorus.
If it's brown, it's iron.
So you can look at the leaves and you can see that they're deficient in nutrients.
It's interesting that someone promises for the rooted person
And whose leaf does not wither?
When we are rooted, when we're kind of embedded in God, our leaves don't go coloured on the end.
They're vibrant and alive, just like a healthy leaf on that image.
But how was it that, how was it the leaves didn't wither?
Well, again, let's remind you, but though, but whose delight is in the law of the Lord and who meditates on his Lord day and night,
You know, when we gather together on a Sunday, we are fed when the Scriptures are taught in the presence of the Holy Spirit.
And we are watered by being ushered into the presence of God through worship.
We were ushered into the presence of God through worship today.
It was beautiful.
And hopefully we're being fed as we unpack the Scriptures.
The Sunday gathered environment is unique.
You can listen to talks online, you can read books, you can listen to podcasts, you can put on worship music at home or as you go through a walk.
And I would encourage us to do all of those things.
They are good and they will feed us and they will water us.
However, they should not replace what we receive from gathering together.
They don't replace it.
To hear the word preached,
in an environment like this, to corporately worship together in the presence of the Holy Spirit is different.
It is different.
It does something to us that we can't receive on our own.
It's why the writer of Hebrews said, and letters consider how we may spur one another on towards love and good deeds, not giving up meeting together as some are in the habit of doing, but encouraging one another.
You know, he recognized that faith isn't an individual endeavor, but it's to be done in community.
You know, we work out our faith in fear and trembling in community, anchored in a church family.
Paul in Ephesians writes, so Christ himself gave the apostles, the prophets, the evangelists, the pastors, the teachers, all kind of leaders in the life of the church who feed into people to equip his people for works of service so that the body
of Christ may be built up until we all reach unity in the faith and in the knowledge of the Son of God and become mature, attaining to the whole measure of the fullness of Christ.
It's community.
It's unity.
It's being together.
Jesus builds His church.
He resources His church so the body can be built up.
Again, we need to understand the underlying assumption.
Paul is writing with, he assumes
that everyone's just turning up.
He assumes that.
That's the assumption in the writings.
You know, when Paul wrote his letter to the church in Ephesus, they didn't photocopy it and give it to individuals to take home and read on their own.
They, everybody came.
And the leaders of the church would sit down with this amazing letter from the apostle Paul
and would read it to the whole community.
They did it together as a family.
There is something powerful about hearing the word of God taught in a gathered environment such as this that feeds us, equips us, builds us up, unites the church.
There is something unique and wonderful about
gathering together to worship Jesus in the presence of the Holy Spirit that waters our souls as sort of a synergistic growth and impact when we do those side by side with others who are worshiping Jesus, it's different to listen to it throughout years.
Headphones.
Nickle and I visited Newcastle C3, church, our friends Rachel and Simon lead it.
We knew them from the invited them over the first week or so when they came to plant just after us about a year after we did.
We had a lovely morning.
The service was great.
They prayed for us.
They prophesied over us.
They spoiled us really.
It was amazing.
We were refreshed.
Yeah, that was the week when we weren't meeting between Christmas and New Year.
It was lovely, but it wasn't home.
It wasn't family.
There is something special about gathering in family to hear the word of God preached and to worship together.
To find fullness of life, to be the well-watered tree, the fruitful runner-beam plant, we need to be anchored in a church family, and we need to be watered and fed, building the habit of being part of a weekly worship service.
Okay, thirdly, we need support.
Now I think runner beans look so nice, hopefully there's another picture, in the garden as they grow up the canes that are placed in the ground to support them.
I think there's something really nice about looking out your window and seeing them and the red flowers.
Without this support of the canes, the runner beans would just be all over the place and just wouldn't be able to
grow as well, wouldn't produce as much fruit, the fruit would probably rot on the ground.
Again, let me just read you Hebrews.
And let us consider how we may spur one another on towards loving good deeds, not giving up meeting together a summer in the habit of doing, but encouraging one another.
You know, when I lead a ministry time on a Sunday, I get the best view in the house.
I get to see the church family gathering around each other,
I get to see people laying hands on each other and I'm praying.
I get to see tears being wiped away, laughter, encouragement, people listening to each other's lives.
I get to see it all from up here.
And I love seeing the conversations after the service.
Sometimes just coffee and donut people hanging out being friends.
Others just following up from the times of prayer, listening, encouraging, supporting,
pouring out lives to each other.
I love to see the canes being put in all over the church as people support each other.
I love to see and hear about people following up and checking in in the week.
I love to hear stories of people calling, people texting, meeting up.
I love to see that life groups have followed up and people are continuing to be supported in life group as well.
Because life can be challenging, can't it?
You know, life can have its ups and downs.
But when you gather weekly in church, when you are known and know others, when the challenges come, the canes are placed around you.
You will be supported, encouraged and spurred on.
You know, over 19, the 19 years that we've led at life in our church, or life living churches have been existed.
We've had people come to us, yes, not many, but a few, and say, we don't feel supported.
And we're like, obviously, they're really sad to hear that.
But pretty much every time when we've dug a little deeper, they're not regularly at church, and they're not part of a life group.
And so, you know, we obviously look at ways in which we can support them once we know.
And we don't always get it right, let's be honest, we're humans.
But the majority of times, the person isn't anchored in church family.
They're not known and they don't know others.
I love the way the runner beans instinctively kind of climb up the canes.
But you do have to train them a little bit at the start.
You bend them around just so they kind of get the idea.
And I'm thinking too hard about this, aren't I?
But when the winds come, the runner beans just kind of think, yeah, bring it on.
I've got my cane.
I'm supported.
It's hard to support people who we don't know.
and who don't know others.
In gathering weekly, we get to build friendships.
Gathering weekly anchors us in a church family.
We are fed by the scriptures, watered by the Holy Spirit, and supported by the church family.
And it's really important to say, we know life sometimes means that we can't always attend Sundays.
We have people in the church whose life has meant that it's sometimes difficult.
But the people I'm thinking of have invested when they can.
They have built friendships that mean they are known and they know others.
What's that phrase?
Make hay where the sun shines.
When we can, let's make hay.
Let's make friends.
Let's anchor ourselves for when the winds come and the storms come.
The canes will be in place that will hold us firm.
But it's a choice.
It's a choice at the start of 2026.
OK, quickly moving on, because I need to come into land.
Although I'm not doing too bad today.
Weeds and pollution.
I'm an environmental plant biologist, so I like pollution.
No, I don't like pollution, but I studied it.
Anyway, back to the talk.
I should never talk about biological stuff.
I go off on random things.
Round gathering weekly helps us to remove the weeds from our life and the pollution from our lives.
Then we will no longer be infants tossed back and forth by the waves and blown here and there by every wind of teaching and by the cunning craftiness of people in their deceitful scheming.
The world is full of distractions of teaching that can take us away from Jesus, encourages to put our roots in other things
Weeds can gather around our lives, just like my bean plants.
I studied ozone when I was at university, doing my research.
Chopper's fake ozone, that's ozone that's around us, that we breathe in.
And it was amazing.
You increased it by a little bit in the climate.
It absolutely
destroyed clover.
Just a small change in the pollution robbed clover of its thriving.
When we place ourselves in environments that are polluting our faith, when we allow weeds to grow up and kind of starve our roots of nutrients, of life, we just don't do very well.
We certainly can't find fullness of life.
Last year, I'm going to be honest, I didn't give my garden the attention it deserved.
And so rather than growing veg, I grew weeds.
And the veg just didn't like it.
They stifled the growth.
Gathering weekly is like weed in the garden.
We should not underestimate this aspect of gathering regularly, even if we don't perceive it.
Gathering weekly is like seeing that weed in your raised bed and going, I'm going to pull that out now.
I'm not going to wait until it's multiplied into 200 weeds across the whole bed.
I'm going to pull that one.
I'm going to do another one over here.
I'm just going to keep it nice.
And that's what happens on a Sunday morning.
When we come, we hear the word of God.
It challenges our thinking, you know, I'm not sure I've thought of that correctly.
Well, actually, I could do some prayer about this, or this is a really difficult thing.
I'm not, or this is an opportunity that I don't think it's the right thing, but I'm tempted.
And then somebody comes alongside and says, well, you know, that's not a great idea, is it?
You know, all of those conversations that we have, all of those times of prayer, all the scriptures we hear is like weeding our garden, taking out the weeds that stifle our growth and our life.
It's like as being planted, not next to an industrial factory,
pouring out pollution, but actually in the open countryside where the air is clear and beautiful.
That's what it's like to be regularly coming to church, being part of a church family anchored.
That's kind of what it's like.
So we gather weekly anchors in church family.
We are fed by scriptures, watered by the Holy Spirit.
We find friendship and support, and it helps our life to be clear of weeds and pollution.
And finally, sunshine.
All plants need sunshine.
And so as we spoke last week, it all starts with Jesus.
We need the light and life of Jesus in our lives.
Gathering weekly on a Sunday is like a warm summer's day, where the clouds roll away.
You know those and you go outside and you're just bathed in sunshine.
That's what it's like when we come on a Sunday and we worship together and we hear the word of God.
taught, and we have fellowshiped together.
The clouds of life roll away, and our full attention goes on Jesus.
And his light just bathes our faces.
When you have a day like that and you watch, you're gonna be, and you can almost see them grow.
They really do grow in one day of warm summer day with no clouds.
It's amazing.
Yeah, Monday to Saturday in our lives, of course we have moments of sunshine, we do.
But life is busy and complex.
Whereas when we set aside two hours on a Sunday every week, we set aside time to place ourselves directly in the light of Jesus without distractions, without the clouds of life.
I'm sure we've all done it, left something on the grass and it goes yellow, like this, yeah, anyone?
I know I've done it a few times.
Well, all it needs is sunshine.
Give it a few days, maybe a week or so, in the sunshine.
It'll soon turn green again.
Gathering weekly helps us to never go yellow and always stay green.
All right, I wasn't expecting that to be funny, Nicola, but thanks for that.
That was actually meant to be profound, but you just laugh away, don't worry.
Nothing like encouragement from your wife, is it?
No.
Gathering weekly helps to never go yellow, but always stay green because we expose ourselves to the life giving light of Jesus.
There you go, Nicola.
Amen, thank you.
Yeah, well, there we go.
So gathering weekly anchors in church family.
We are fed by scriptures, watered by the Holy Spirit.
We find friendship and support, and it helps us to keep our life clear of weeds and pollution, and it places us in direct alignment with the light of Jesus.
And this helps us to live the full life and be fruitful in harvest, to bear fruit in our lives.
I really do need to land, don't I?
I want to challenge you this year.
And if you're listening online, especially if you're able, I know sometimes you can't come along and we'd still love to connect with you.
So reach out to us via office at life in your dot church and we'll find ways to help you feel connected.
But if you can, here's my invitation.
Do an experiment this year.
Here's the experiment.
Try to come.
every week to church.
And if not every week as many as possible, for a whole year and just see what happens.
Because I am 100% confident, absolutely convinced you'll have a greater measure of the fullness of life by the end of the year, if you do that.
You'll have more friends, you'll feel more connected,
You'll feel better fed and watered.
You'll find more support.
You'll reach all the deeper in Jesus.
And don't take my word for it.
They met every day in the early church.
See, I'm confident if you do that, you will be like a tree planted by streams of water, which yields its fruit and season
whose leaf does not wither whatever they do prosperous, a tree like this.
Who wouldn't lie to be a tree like that in life?
Shall we pray?